[SYCL][RFC] Main page for Upstreaming SYCL RFC (#11432)
intel/llvm: clang/docs/SYCLMainPageforRFC.md

# Add full support for the SYCL programming model

> We (Intel) would like to request to add full support for SYCL programming model support to LLVM/Clang project to facilitate collaboration on C++ single-source heterogeneous programming for accelerators like GPU, FPGA, DSP, etc. from different hardware and software vendors. The SYCL 2020 Specification is available at the Khronos site: https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We (Intel) propose adding full support for the SYCL programming model to the LLVM/Clang project to facilitate collaboration on C++ single-source heterogeneous programming for accelerators (e.g., GPU, FPGA, DSP) from different hardware and software vendors. The SYCL 2020 Specification is available at the Khronos site: https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html.
```

Author: Thanks, done.

Our prior RFC toward this effort can be seen here: https://lists.llvm.org/pipermail/cfe-dev/2019-January/060811.html

In the four years since then: 
  *   both our design and SYCL have evolved (e.g. the previous RFC supported SYCL 1.2.1)
  *   we have multiple years of SYCL implementation experience
  *   we have received feedback from the community for both the original RFC as well as patches that we have upstreamed
  *   we have real-world user feedback from talking with our customers
  *   we have worked with Codeplay in supporting non-Intel hardware
and as a result now have a more mature set of design and implementation that we can upstream that is more in line with community standards and expectations.

> SYCL is an open specification and Intel supports a community implementation that fully meets this specification.  This would allow for open tooling and be in line with the goals of the Unified Acceleration (UXL) Foundation: https://www.oneapi.io/blog/announcing-the-unified-acceleration-uxl-foundation/

Reviewer 2: SYCL is an open specification from the Khronos Group ([https://www.khronos.org/sycl](https://www.khronos.org/sycl)), and Intel supports etc. etc.

> SYCL is an open specification and Intel wants an implementation that fully meets this specification in the community.  This allows for open tooling and is in line with the goals of the Unified Acceleration (UXL) Foundation: https://www.oneapi.io/blog/announcing-the-unified-acceleration-uxl-foundation/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SYCL is an open specification and Intel supports a community implementation that fully meets this specification.  This would allow for open tooling and be in line with the goals of the Unified Acceleration (UXL) Foundation: https://www.oneapi.io/blog/announcing-the-unified-acceleration-uxl-foundation.
```

Author: Thanks, done.

> We have long term commitment to supporting SYCL.  Alexey Bader, who is deeply involved with both the community and SYCL, is the SYCL code owner.

Reviewer: I feel like we need to say more here than just dropping Alexey's name. Intel employs quite a few people working on SYCL. Can we say something about sponsorships? The UXL? Funding for The Khronos Group? Codeplay? Other contributors to LLVM and Clang?

```suggestion
We have a long term commitment to supporting SYCL.  Alexey Bader is the SYCL code owner and has a long history of work within the LLVM community and the development of the SYCL specification.
```

Author: Rephrased as you suggested.
But for the bigger point: @jbrodman, could you please suggest the necessary stuff here including anything we need for community/political correctness?

> We have a long term commitment to supporting SYCL.  Alexey Bader is the SYCL code owner and has a long history of work within the LLVM community and the development of the SYCL specification.

Reviewer 2: We have worked with Codeplay to enable non-Intel hardware and hope that a community implementation will further enable SYCL support on a broader range of devices.

## Topics of interest

In this RFC, we would like to request your feedback for the following items:

* Driver: Enabling command-line options, adjusting compilation tool chains
* Front End: Integration Header and Footer 
* Front End: Lowering of SYCL Kernel

> * Front End: Support for Unnamed Lambdas as SYCL kernels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Front End: Support for unnamed SYCL kernel functions
```
This is more in line with terminology used in the SYCL specification.

Author: Fixed, thanks.

> # Add full support for the SYCL programming model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discourse topic details:
- Category: [LLVM Project](https://discourse.llvm.org/c/llvm/5)
- Title: "RFC: Add full support for the SYCL programming model"
- Tags: sycl

# Add full support for the SYCL programming model
```

Reviewer: The previous RFC was posted to the Clang Frontend Discourse category and all of the other RFCs that we have planned are likewise targeted. I suggest we therefore change the target for this RFC as well.
```suggestion
Discourse topic details:
- Category: [Clang Frontend](https://discourse.llvm.org/c/clang/6)
- Title: "RFC: Add full support for the SYCL programming model"
- Tags: sycl

# Add full support for the SYCL programming model
```

We (Intel) propose adding full support for the SYCL programming model support to the LLVM/Clang project to facilitate collaboration on C++ single-source heterogeneous programming for accelerators (e.g., GPU, FPGA, DSP) from different hardware and software vendors. The SYCL 2020 Specification is available at the Khronos site: https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html.

Our prior RFC toward this effort can be seen here: https://lists.llvm.org/pipermail/cfe-dev/2019-January/060811.html

> In the four years since then: 

Reviewer 3: In the last four years, Here are some of the major developments in our SYCL compilation efforts:

  *   both our design and SYCL have evolved (e.g. the previous RFC supported SYCL 1.2.1)
  *   we have multiple years of SYCL implementation experience
  *   we have received feedback from the community for both the original RFC as well as patches that we have upstreamed
  *   we have real-world user feedback from talking with our customers
  *   we have worked with Codeplay in supporting non-Intel hardware

> and as a result now have a more mature set of design and implementation that we can upstream that is more in line with community standards and expectations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a result now have a more mature set of design and implementation that we can upstream that is more in line with community standards and expectations.
```

SYCL is an open specification from the Khronos Group (https://www.khronos.org/sycl/) and Intel supports a community implementation that fully meets this specification.  This would allow for open tooling and be in line with the goals of the Unified Acceleration (UXL) Foundation: https://www.oneapi.io/blog/announcing-the-unified-acceleration-uxl-foundation/

> We have a long term commitment to supporting SYCL.  Alexey Bader is the SYCL code owner and has a long history of work within the LLVM community and the development of the SYCL specification.  We have worked with Codeplay to enable non-Intel hardware and hope that a community implementation will further enable SYCL support on a broader range of devices.

Reviewer 3: SYCL code owner (where?)

> We have a long term commitment to supporting SYCL.  Alexey Bader is the SYCL code owner and has a long history of work within the LLVM community and the development of the SYCL specification.  We have worked with Codeplay to enable non-Intel hardware and hope that a community implementation will further enable SYCL support on a broader range of devices.

Reviewer: Should we perhaps say something about our intention being to use the upstreamed implementation in Intel's own compiler as a demonstration of commitment?

Author: How about:
We have a long term commitment to supporting SYCL and intend to use the upstreamed implementation in our compiler products to the extent possible.  ...

Reviewer: I would drop the "to the extent possible" part, but that sounds good otherwise.

We would like to lift these limitations, at least in the common case where the user uses clang for both the host and device compilation phases.  Our thought was to implement a different integration approach for this common case, which might assume that the host compiler understands clang attributes like __builtin_sycl_unique_stable_name and decorates the LLVM IR with some new attributes.  Our thinking is very early at this point.

Even if we develop this new approach, though, we think it makes sense to keep the approach based on the integration headers because this will continue to be used for a third-party host compiler.

### Location for the logic for generating the integration support

> Another open question is the location for the logic that generates the integration headers (or the new integration information alluded to above).  This logic is currently located in the sema phase of the CFE, and the community has expressed concern about this.  We are considering two alternatives.  One option is to move the logic to the codegen phase of the CFE.  Another is to move the logic out of the CFE entirely and create a new LLVM IR pass instead.  If we do this, the new IR pass would likely run near the start of the pipeline, before other IR passes can transform the IR that is emitted by the CFE.  This option may be attractive especially if we end up supporting two integration methods because we could isolate each method in its own IR pass, and then enable one or the other pass depending on whether the user requests a third-party host compiler.

Author: It is spelled 'Sema' and 'CodeGen' respectively.   Fixed.

### Dependency on the Khronos LLVMIR / SPIRV translator

> With our current approach, a SYCL source file is compiled to a fat object, which contains both host code and embedded LLVM IR for the device code.  When these objects are linked together, the LLVM IR modules from all objects are linked together, and then the sycl-post-link tool performs some final IR transformations that require visibility to the entire IR for each offload kernel.  After these final IR passes complete, we translate the LLVM IR to SPIR-V, which is embedded in the fat executable.

Reviewer 3: Based on discussion during meeting, we intend to call this 'multi-targeted object, instead of 'fat object'.

Thanks

This final translation to SPIR-V currently relies on the Khronos SPIR-V translator, which is an external project.  As a result, the end user must ensure that the translator is installed and on the PATH in order have a working clang for SYCL.  We would like to eliminate this dependency in order to make it easier for people to use clang for SYCL.

> We are investigating ways to use the clang SPIR-V backend in place of the Khronos translator by using it at the end of the sycl-post-link tool.

Reviewer 4: This wording avoids the issue that the final LLVM IR to SPIRV translation happens at link time (sycl-post-link), not at compile time.  The central question, then, is whether we can leverage the spirv backend as part of the sycl-post-link tool.  I thought you said in an earlier conversation that you were looking into the possibility of doing this, but maybe I misunderstood?

> We are investigating ways to use the clang SPIR-V backend in place of the Khronos translator by using it at the end of the sycl-post-link tool.

Reviewer 3: based on offline conversation with Greg, I have modified the comment. @premanandrao, please address this when convenient.

Thanks

### Dependency on the Khronos LLVM-SPIRV translator

With our current approach, device code corresponding to the offload region is compiled into LLVM IR.  Various backend compilers (e.g., Intel Graphics Compiler), require the device code to be present in SPIR-V IR.  Hence, the LLVM IR needs to be translated into SPIR-V IR.

This final translation to SPIR-V currently relies on the Khronos SPIRV-LLVM translator, which is a project external to the LLVM compiler infrastructure.  As a result, end users must ensure that the translator is available in their environment, so that the clang front-end driver is able to find it during compilation for SYCL.  We would like to eliminate this dependency in order to make it easier for people to use clang for SYCL.

> A SPIR-V backend is currently under development inside the LLVM compiler infrastructure.  Once deployed, this backend can replace the current translator in the SYCL compilation flow.

Reviewer 3: I think my update to the comment that I added got lost. I will reupload my comment.

Thanks

> With our current approach, device code corresponding to the offload region is compiled into LLVM IR.  Various backend compilers (e.g., Intel Graphics Compiler), require the device code to be present in SPIR-V IR.  Hence, the LLVM IR needs to be translated into SPIR-V IR.
> 
> This final translation to SPIR-V currently relies on the Khronos SPIRV-LLVM translator, which is a project external to the LLVM compiler infrastructure.  As a result, end users must ensure that the translator is available in their environment, so that the clang front-end driver is able to find it during compilation for SYCL.  We would like to eliminate this dependency in order to make it easier for people to use clang for SYCL.
> 
> A SPIR-V backend is currently under development inside the LLVM compiler infrastructure.  Once deployed, this backend can replace the current translator in the SYCL compilation flow.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With our current approach, device code corresponding to offload region in SYCL source file is compiled and linked into LLVM IR. Various backend compilers (Intel Graphics Compiler, etc), require the device code to be present in SPIR-V IR. Hence, we need a compiler flow to generate SPIR-V IR from LLVM IR during the post-link stage.
This final translation to SPIR-V IR currently relies on the Khronos SPIRV-LLVM translator, which is a project external to LLVM compiler infrastructure.  As a result, end users must ensure that the translator is available in their environment, so that the clang driver is able to find it during post-link stage of compilation for SYCL.  We would like to eliminate this dependency in order to make it easier for people to use clang for SYCL.
A SPIR-V backend is currently under development inside LLVM compiler infrastructure. Once deployed, this backend can replace the current translator in the post-link stage of SYCL compilation flow.
```

Reviewer 4: Thanks, @asudarsa.  Yes, this looks better.
